@c This is part of the GNU SQL Server manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1996, Free Software Foundation, Inc
@c See file gss.texi for copying conditions.
@node Acknowledgments, Intro, Manifesto, Top
@chapter Acknowledgments

Many people have contributed code included in the Free Software
Foundation's distribution of GNU SQL Server. To show our appreciation for
their public spirit, we list here those who have written substantial
portions.

This package was originally developed by research staff of Institute
of System Programming of Russian Academy of Science and students of
Moscow State University. Contributors to GNU SQL Server include
Sergei Kuznetsov, Michael Kimelman, Vera Ponomarenko,
Konstantin Dyshlevoy, Andrei Yachine, Eugene Voinov.

@c @itemize @bullet
@c @c @item
@c Per Abrahamsen wrote @file{double.el}, for typing accented characters
@c not normally available from the keyboard, and @file{cpp.el}, which hides
@c or highlights parts of C programs according to preprocessor conditionals.

@c @item
@c Jay K. Adams wrote @file{jka-compr.el}, providing automatic
@c decompression and recompression for compressed files.

@c @item
@c Frank Bresz wrote @file{diff.el}, a program to display @code{diff}
@c output.

@c @end itemize

@c Others too numerous to mention have reported and fixed bugs, and added
@c features to many parts of Emacs.  We thank them for their generosity as
@c well.

@c This list is intended to mention every contributor of a major package or
@c feature we currently distribute; if you know of someone we have omitted,
@c please report that as a manual bug.
